For so moche as noble persones £cannot rewle ne governe £without the servyse and werke £of the people, £than hit behoveth £to devyse the oultrages £and the offyces of the werkmen.
Than I shal begynne first £at the first pawn £that is in the play of the chesse £and signefieth £a man of the comyn peple on fote.
For they be al named “pietons," £that is as moche £to say as footmen.
And thenne we wyl begynne £at the pawn £whyche standeth £tofore the rooke £on the right syde of the kyng, £for as moche as thys pawne apperteyneth £to serve the vycayre or lyeuetenaunt £of the kyng and other officers £under hym of necessaries of vytaylle.
And this maner of peple is figured £and ought be maad £in the forme and shappe £of a man holdyng £in his right honde £a spade or shovel, £and a rodde in the lyft hand.
The spade or shovel is for £to delve and labour £therwyth the erthe, £and the rodde is for £to dryve and conduyte £wyth al the bestys £unto her pasture.
Also, he ought to have £on hys gyrdel £a sarpe or crokyd hachet £for to cutte £of the superfluytees £of the vignes and trees.
And we rede in the Bible £that the first labourer £that ever was was Caym, £the first sone of Adam, £that was so evyl £that he slewe his broder Abel, £for as moche as the smoke £of his tithes £went strayt unto heven, £and the smoke and fume £of the tythes of Caym £went dounward upon the erthe.
And how wel that thys cause was trewe.
Yet was there another cause of envye £that he had unto his broder.
For when Adam, theyr fader, £maryed them £for to multeplye the erthe of his ligne, £he wold not marye ner joyne £togyder the two £that were borne attones, £but gaf unto Caym £her that was born with Abel, £and to Abel £her that was borne wyth Caym.
And thus began the envye £that Caym had ayenst Abel, £for hys wyf was fayrer £than Caym’s wyf.
And for this cause he sle[we] Abel £wyth the chekebone of a beste.
And at that tyme was never no maner of yron £blody of manne’s blood.
And Abel was the fyrst martir £in the Olde Testament.
And thys sayd Caym £dyd many other evyl thynges £whiche I leve, £for it apperteyneth not to my mater.
But it behoveth for necessyté 
that somme shold laboure the erthe £after the synne of Adam.
For tofore or Adam synned, £the erthe brought forth fruyt £without labour of handes.
But sithe he synned, £hit must nedes be laboured £with the handes of men.
And for as moche as the erthe £is moder of al thynges, £and that we were first formed £and took our begynnyng of the erthe, £the same wyse at the last, £she shal be the ende £unto al us and to al thynges.
And God that formed us £of the erthe hath ordeyned £that by the labour of men £she shold gyve nourysshyng £unto al that lyveth.
And first the labourer of the erthe £ought to knowe his God £that formed and made heven and erthe of nought, £and ought to have loyalté 
and trouth in hymself, £and despise deth £for to entende to his labour.
And he ought to geve thankynges £to hym that made hym £and of whom he receyveth £al his goodes temporal, £wherof his lyf is susteyned.
And also, he is bounden £to paye the dismes and tythes £of al his thynges, £and not as Caym dyd £but as Abel dyd of the beste £that he chese out alwey £for to gyve to God £and to plese Hym.
For they that grutche and be greved £in that they rendre and geve to God £the tienthes of her goodes, £they ought to be aferd £and have drede £that they shal falle in necessyté, £and that they myght be despoylyd or robbyd £by warre or by tempest £that myght falle or happen in the contray.
And hit is no merveylle, £though hyt so happen £for that man that is disagreable £unto God and weneth £that the multeplyeng £of his goodes temporel cometh £by the vertu of his owne counceyl £and his witte, £the whiche is made £by the only ordenaunce of Hym £that made al, £and by the same ordenaunce £is sone taken awey £fro hym that is disagreable.
And hit is reson £that whan a man haboundeth £by fortune in goodes £and knowith not God £by whom it cometh, £that to hym come somme other fortune £by the whiche he may £requyre grace and pardon, £and to knowe his God.
And we rede of the Kyng Davyd, £that was first symple £and one of the comyn peple, £that whan fortune had enhauncid £and sette him in grete estate, £he left and forgate his God, £and fyl to advoultrie and homycide £and other synnes.
Than anone his owne sone, £Absalon, assaillid £and began to persecute hym. £And than whan he sawe £that fortune was contrarye to hym, £he began to take ageyn his vertuous werkis £and requyred pardon £and so retorned to God agayn.
We rede also of the children of Ysrael, £that were nygh enfamyned in desert, £and sore hungry and thrusty, £that they prayed £and requyred of God for remedye.
Anone He chaunged His wille £and sent to hem manna and flessh.
And whan they were replenysshed and fatte £of the flessh of bestes £and of the manna, £they made a calf of gold £and worshipped hit, £whiche was a grete synne and inyquyté.
For whan they were hongry, £they knewe God.
And whan theyr belies £were filled and fatted, £they forgid ydolles £and were ydolatreres.
After this every labourer £ought to be faithful and trewe, £that whan his maister delyvereth £to hym his lande to be laboured, £that he take nothyng to hymself £but that he ought to have and is his, £but laboure truly £and take cure and charge £in the name of hys maystre, £and do more diligently hys mayster’s labours £than his owen, £for the lyf of the most grete and noble men £next God lieth £in the handes of the labourers.
And thus al craftes and occupacions ben ordeyned £not only to suffise to them only £but to [the] comyn.
And so it happeth oft tyme £that the labourer of the erth £useth grete and boistous metis, £and bryngeth to his maister £more subtile and more deynteous metes.
And Valerius rehercith in his sixt book £that there was a wyse and noble maistre £that was named Anthonius, £that was accusid of a caas of avoultry.
And as the cause henge £tofore the juges, £his accusers or denonciatours brought a labourer £that closed his lande, £for so moche as they sayd £whan his mayster went £to do the advoultrye, £this same servaunt bare the lanterne, £wherof Anthonius was sore abasshid £and douted that he shold depose agaynst hym.
But the labourer, £that was named Papirion, £said to his maister £that he shold denye his cause hardily £unto the juges, £for to be tormentid, £his cause shold never be enpeyred by hym, £ner nothyng shold yssue £out of his mouth £wherof he shold be noyed or grevyd.
And than was the labourer beten and tormentid, £and brent in many places of his body.
But he sayd never thyng £wherof his maister was hurt or noyed.
But the other that accused his maister were punysshed, £and Papirion was delyverd £of his paynes.
And also tellith Valerius £that there was another labourer £that was named Penapion, £that servyd a maister £whos name was Themes, £which was of mervaillous faith £to his maister.
For hit befel £that certeyn knyghtes cam £to his maister’s hows £for to slé hym.
And anone as Penapion knewe hit, £he went into his maister’s chambre £and wold not be knowen, £for he did on his mayster’s gowne £and his rynge on his fyngre, £and lay in his bedde, £and thus put hymself in parelle of deth £for to respyte hys mayster’s lyf.
But we see nowadayes many fooks £that daigne not £to use grose metis of labourers £and flee the cours clothyng £and maners of a servaunt.
Every wyse man [who is] a servaunt £that trewly servyth his maister £is free and not bonde.
But a fool that is over proud is bonde.
For the debylité and feblenes of corage £that is broken in conscience £by pryde, envye, £or by covetyse is right servytude.
Yet they ought not to doubte to laboure.
For fere and drede of deth, £no man ought to love £to moche his lyf, £for hit is a foul thyng £for a man to renne £to the deth £for the envye of his lyf.
And a wyse man £and a stronge man £ought not to fle £for his lyf, £but to yssue. £For there is no man £that lyveth £but he must nedes dye.
And of this speketh Claudyan, £and saith that al tho thynges £that the ayer goth £about and envyronneth, £and alle thyng that the erthe laboureth, £al thynges that ben conteyned £within the see, £al thynges that the flodes brynge forth, £alle thynges that ben norisshed, £and al the bestes that ben £under the heven shal deporte £alle from the world.
And al shal goo £at His commaundement, £as wel kynges, prynces, £and al that the world envyronneth £and goeth about.
Alle shal goo this way.
Than he ought not to doubte £for fere of deth.
For as wel shal dye the ryche £as the poure.
Deth maketh alle thynge lyke £and putteth al to an ende.
And therof made a noble versefyer £two versis whiche folowe: £“Forma, genus, mores, sapiencia, res, et honores / £Morte ruant subita £sola manent merita. £" 
Wherof the Englissh is: £“Beauté, lignage, maners, wysedom, thynges and honoures / £Shal ben deffetid by sodeyn deth; £nothyng shal abyde £but the meritis. £" 
And herof fynde we in Vitas patrum £that ther was an erle, £a riche and noble man, £that had a sone onely.
And whan thys sone was of age £to have knowleche of the lawe, £he herde in a sermone £that deth spareth none.
And as wel dyeth the yonge £as the olde.
And that the deth ought specially £to be doubted £for thre causes.
One was that no man knoweth £whan he comyth.
And the second, £ner in what state £he taketh a man.
And the thyrd, £he wote never £whether he shal goo.
Therfore eche man £shold dispyse £and flee the world, £and lyve wel, £and holde hym toward God.
And whan this yonge man £herde this thyng, £he wente out of his contray £and fledde unto a wyldernesse £unto an hermytage.
And whan his fader had loste hym, £he made grete sorowe £and dyd do enquere £and seke hym so moche £that atte last he was founden £in the hermytage.
And thenne his fader £cam theder to hym and sayd, £“Dere sone, come from thens! £Thou shalt be after my dethe erle £and chyef of my lignage.
I shal be lost £yf thou come not £out from thens." £And he than, £that wyst none otherwyse £to eschewe the yre of his fader, £bethought hym and sayd, £“Dere fader, £there is in your contré 
and lande a right evyll custume.
Yf hit plese you £to put that awey, £I shal gladly come £out of this place £and goo with you."
The fader was glad and had grete joye, £and demaunded of hym £what hit was.
And yf he wolde telle hym, £he promysed hym £to take hit awey, £and hit shold be lefte £and sette aparte. £Than he sayd, £“Dere fader, £there dyen as wel the yonge folke £as the olde in your contray.
Do that awey, £I praye you."
Whan his fader herde that, £he sayd, £“Dere sone, £that may not be, £ner no man may put that awey £but God onely."
Than answerd the sone to the fader, £“Than wyl I serve Hym £and dwelle here wyth Hym £that may do that."
And so abode the childe £in the hermytage £and lyved there in good werkis.
After this, £hit apperteyneth to a labourer £to entende to his labour £and flee ydelnes.
And thou oughtest to knowe £that Davyd preyseth moche £in the Sawlter £the trewe labourers and sayth, £“Thou shalt ete the labour £of thyn handes £and thou art blessyd, £and He shal doo £to thee good."
And hit behoveth £that the labourer endende £to his labour £on the werkedayes £for to recuyel and gadre togydre £the fruyt of hys laboure.
And also, he ought to reste on the holy day, £bothe he and hys bestys.
And a good labourer £ought to norisshe and kepe his bestys.
And this is signyfyed £by the rodde £that he hath, £whiche is for to lede £and dryve them to the pasture.
The first pastour £that ever was was Abel, £whyche was juste and trewe, £and offrid to God the bestis £unto hys sacrefise.
And hym ought he to folowe £in craft and maners.
But no man that useth £the malyce of Caym £maye ensue and folowe Abel.
And thus hit apperteyneth £to the labourer £to sette and graffe trees and vygnes, £and also to plante and cutte them.
And so dyd Noe, £whyche was the first £that planted the vygne £after the deluge and flood.
For as Josephus reherceth £in the Book of Naturel Thynges, £Noe was he that fonde first the vigne, £and he fonde hym bytter and wylde.
And therfore he took four maners of blood, £that is to wete £the blood of a lyon, £the blood of a lamb, £the blood of a swyne, £and the blood of an ape, £and medlid them al togeder £wyth the erthe.
And than he cutte the vigne £and put thys about the rotes therof, £to the ende that the byttirnes £shold be put awey, £and that hit shold be swete.
And whan he had dronken £of the fruyt of thys vygne, £hit was so good and myghty £that he becam so dronke £that he despoyled hym £in suche wyse £that his pryvy membres myght be seen.
And his yongest sone, £Cham, mocqued and skorned hym.
And whan Noe was awaked £and was sobre and fastyng, £he assemblid his sones £and shewed to them £the nature of the vygne and of the wyn, £and tolde to them the cause £why that he had put the blood £of the bestes £about the rote of the vigne, £and that they shold knowe £wel that otherwhile, £by the strengthe of the wyn, £men be maad £as hardy as the lyon and yrous.
And otherwhile, £they be made symple and shamefast as a lambe, £and lecherous as a swyne, £and curious and ful of play as an ape.
For the ape is of suche nature £that whan he seeth one doo a thyng, £he enforceth hym £to do the same, £and so don many £whan they ben dronke.
They wyl meddle them £with al offycers and maters £that apperteyne nothyng to them.
And whan they ben fastyng and sobre, £they can scarcely accomplisshe theyr owne thynges.
And therfore, £Valerian reherceth £that of auncient £and in olde tyme women dranke no wyn, £for as moche as by dronkenshyp, £they myght falle £in ony filthe or vylony. £And as Ovyde saith, £that the wynes £otherwhyle apparaylle the corages £in suche manere £that they ben covenable to al synnes, £whiche take awey the hertes £to do wel.
They make the poure, riche, £as longe as the wyn is in his heed.
And shortly, dronkenshyp is the begynnyng £of alle evylles, £and corrupteth the body, £and destroyeth the sowle, £and mynyssheth the goodes temporels.
And this suffiseth for the labourers.
The second chappytre of the thyrd tractate £treteth of the forme and maner £of the second pawne £and of the maner of a smyth.
Capitulo secundo.
The second pawn that stondeth £tofore the knyght £on the right syde of the kyng £hath the forme and fygure of a man £as a smyth £and that is reson.
For hit apperteyneth £to the knyghtes £to have bridellys, sadellis, spores, £and many other thynges maad £by the handes of smythes, £and ought to holde an hamer £in his right hond, £and in his lift hande a squyer.
And he ought to have £on his gyrdel a trowel, £for by this is signefyed £alle maner of werkmen £as goldsmythes, marchallis, smythes of alle forges, forgers £and makers of money.
And al maner of smythes £ben signefyed £by the martel or hamer.
The carpenters ben signefyed £by the dolabre or squyer.
And by the trowel we understonde £al masons and kervers of stones, tylers, £and al those that make howses, castels, and towres.
And unto al thyse crafty men hit aperteyneth £that they be trewe, wyse, and stronge. £And hit is nede £that they have £in hemself fayth and loyaulté.
For unto the goldsmythes £behoveth golde and sylver, £and alle other metallys, £yren and steel, to other.
And unto the carpentiers and masons £ben put to theyr edefyces £the bodyes and goodes of the peple.
And also men put in the handes of the maroners £body and goodes of the peple.
And in the garde and sewerté of them, £men put body and sowle £in the parilles of the see.
And therfore ought they to be trewe £unto whom men commytte suche grete charge £and so grete thynges £upon her fayth and truste.
And therfore sayth the phylosopher: £“He that leseth his fayth and beleve £may lose no gretter ne more thynge."
And fayth is a soverayn good £and cometh of the good £wylle of the herte £and of his mynde, £and for no necessyté wyl deceyve no man, £and is not corrupt £for no mede.
Valerius rehercith £that Fabius had receyved £of Hanybal certeyn prysoners £that he helde of the Romayns £for a certeyn somme of money, £whiche he promysed to paye £to the sayd Hanybal.
And whan he cam £unto the senatours of Rome £and desyred to have the money lente for hem, £they answerd that they wold not paye nor lene.
And than Fabius sent his sone to Rome £and made hym £to selle hys heritage and patrymonye, £and sent the money £that he receyvyd therof unto Hanybal, £and had lever and lovyd better £to be poure £in his contréy of heritage £than of beleve and fayth.
 But in thyse dayes £it were grete folye £to have suche affyaunce £in moche peple £but yf they had ben prevyd afore. £For oftentymes men truste in them £by whom they ben deceyvyd £at theyr nede.
And it is to wete £that these crafty men and werkmen £ben soveraynly proffytable unto the world.
And wythout artificers and werkmen, £the world myght not be governed.
And knowe thou verily £that alle tho thynges £that ben engendrid £on the erthe £and on the see ben maad £and formed for to do proffyt £unto the lignage of man, £for man was formed £for to have generacion £that the men myght helpe £and proffyt eche other.
And here in ought we to folowe nature, £for she sheweth to us £that we shold do comyn proffyt, £one to another.
And the first fondement of justyce £is that no man shold noye ne greve other, £but that they ought do the comen proffyt.
For men say in reproche, £“That I see of thyn, £I hope hit shal be myn."
But who is he in thyse dayes £that entendeth more to the comyn proffyt £than to his owne? £Certeynly none.
But alwey a man £ought to have drede and fere £of his owne hows £whan he seeth his £neyghbour’s hows afyre.
And therfore ought men £gladly helpe the comyn prouffyt, £for men otherwhyle sette not £by a lytyl fyre £and myght quenche hit in the begynnyng £that afterward maketh a grete blasygng fire.
And fortune hath of nothyng £so grete plesure £as for to torne and werke alwey.
And nature is so noble a thyng £that whereas she is, £she wyl susteyne and kepe.
But thys rewle of nature £hath faylled longe tyme.
How wel that the decree saith £that alle the thynges £that been ayenst the lawe of nature £ought to be taken awey £and put aparte.
And he sayth tofore £in the eighth distinccion £that the ryght lawe of nature defferenceth £ofte tymes fro custom and statutes establisshyd.
For by lawe of nature £al thyng ought £to be comyn to every man.
And thys lawe was of olde tyme.
And men wene yet specially £that the Trojans kept this lawe, £and we rede that the multitude of the Trojans £was one herte and one sowle.
And verayly we fynde £that in tyme passid £the philosophres dide the same.
And also, it is to be supposid £that suche as have theyr goodes comune £and not propre is most acceptable to God.
For ellis wold not thyse £religyous men £as monkes, freres, chanons, observauntes, £and al other avowe hem £and kepe the wylful poverté 
that they ben professyd to? £For in trouth I have myself £ben conversaunt in a religious hows £of Whyt Freres at Gaunt, £whiche have al thyng £in comyn among them, £and not one richer than another, £insomoche that yf a man gaf £to a frere three pence or four pence £to praye for hym in his masse, £as sone as the masse is don, £he delyveryeth hit £to his overest or procuratour, £in whiche hows ben many vertuous and devout freris.
And yf that lyf were not the best £and the most holyest, £Holy Chirche wold never suffre hit in religyon.
And accordyng therto, £we rede in Plato, £whiche sayth £that the cyté is wel £and justly governed and ordeyned £in the which no man may say £by right, by custome, ne by ordenaunce, £“Thys is myn."
But I say to thee certeynly £that sythen this custome £came forth to say £“This is myn, £and this is thyn," £no man thought £to preferre the comyn prouffyt £so moche as his owne. £And al werkmen ought to be wyse £and wel advysed £so that they have none envye £ne none evyll suspecion one to another.
For God wyl £that our humayn nature be covetous of two thynges, £that is of religyon £and of wysedom. £But in this caas ben £somme often tymes deceyved.
For they take often tymes religyon £and leve wysedom, £and they take wysedom £and refuse religion.
And none may be veray £and trewe wythout other.
For it apperteyneth £not to a wyse man £to do onythyng £that he may repente hym of hit, £and he ought to do nothyng £ayenst his wylle £but to do al thyng nobly, £meurely, fermely, and honestly.
And yf he have envye upon ony, £hit is folye, £for he on whom he hath envye £is more honest £and of more havoyr £than he whiche is so envyous.
For a man may have none envye on another, £but bycause he is more fortunat £and hath more grace than hymself.
For envye is a sorowe of corage £that cometh of this ordenaunce £of the prouffyt of another man.
And knowe thou verily £that he that is ful of bounté 
shal never have envye of another.
But the envyous man seeth £and thynketh alwey £that every man is more noble £and more fortunat that hymself, £and saith alwey to hymself, £“That man wynneth more than I!" £and “Myn neyghbours have more plenté of bestes!" £and “Her thynges multeplye more than myn!" £And therfore thou oughtest knowe £that envye is the most grettest dedely synne £that is, for she tormenteth hym £that hath her within hym £wythout tormentyng or doyng ony harme to hym £on whom he hath envye.
And an envyous man £hath no vertu in hymself, £for he corrumpeth hymself, £for as moche as he hateth £alwey the welthe and vertues of other.
And thus ought they to kepe them £that they take none evyl suspecion.
For a man naturelly, £whan his affeccion hath suspecion in ony man £that he weneth £that he doth, £hit semeth to hym veryly £that it is don.
And it is an evyl thyng £for a man £to have suspecion on hymself.
For we rede that Dyonyse of Zecyle, a tyraunt, £was so suspecious £that he had so grete fere and drede.
For as moche as he was hated of alle men, £that he put his frendes £out of theyr offyces £that they had and put other straungers in their places £for to kepe his body, £and chese suche £as were right cruel and felons.
And for fere and doubte of the barbours, £he made his doughters £to lerne shave and kembe.
And whan they were grete, £he wold not they £shold use ony yron £to be occupyed by them £but to brenne and senge his heeris, £and menaced them £and durst not truste in them.
And in like wyse £they had none affyaunce in hym.
And also, he did do envyronne £the place where he lay £wyth grete dyches and brode lyke a castel.
And he entrid by a drawe bridge, £whiche closid after hym.
And his knyghtes laye £wythout wyth his gardes, £whiche watched and kept £straytly thys forteresse.
And whan Plato sawe thys said Dionyse, £Kyng of Zecille, £thus envyroned and sette about £wyth gardes and watchemen £for the cause of his suspescion, £sayd to hym openly £tofore alle men, £“Kynge, why hast thou don £so moche evyl and harme £that thee behoveth to be kept £wyth so moche peple? £And therfore I say £that it apperteyneth not to ony man £that wylle truly behave hymself £in his werkes £to be suspecious. £" 
And also, they ought £to be stronge and seure £in theyr werkys.
And specially they £that ben maysters and maronners £on the see.
For yf they be tumerous and ferdful, £they shold make aferde them £that ben in theyr shippis £that knowe not the parilles.
And so hit myght happen that £by that drede and fere, £al men shold leve theyr labour, £and so they myght be perisshed and dispeyrid £in theyr corages.
For a shyppe is soon perisshed and lost £by a litil tempest £whan the governour faylleth £to governe his shyppe for drede £and can geve no counceyl to other.
Thenne it is no mervaylle £though they be aferde £that ben in his governaunce.
And therfore ought to be £in them strengthe, force, and corage, £and [they] ought £to considere the paryls £that myght falle.
And the governour specially ought £not to doubte.
And yf hyt happyn £that ony parril falle, £he ought to promyse £to the other good hoop. £And hit aperteyneth £wel that a man of good and hardy corage £be sette in that office, £in suche wyse £that he have ferme £and seure mynde £ayenst the parylles £that oft tymes happen in the see.
And wyth this ought the maronners £have good and ferme creaunce £and beleve in God, £and to be of good recomforte £and of fayr langage unto them £that he governeth £in suche parellys.
And thys suffyseth to you £as touchyng the labourers.
The thyrd chappytre £of the thyrd book treteth £of the office of notaries, advocates, skryvenars, and drapers or clothmakers.
Capitulo tercio.
The third pawn, £whiche is sette £tofore the alphyn on the right syde, £ought to be fygured as a clerke.
And hit is reson that he shold so be.
For as moche as emonge the comune peple £of whom we speke in this boke £they plete the differences, contencions, and causes, £otherwhyle the whiche £behoveth the alphyns £to geve sentence £and juge as juges.
And hit is reson £that the alphyn or juge £have his notarye, £by whom the processe may be wreton.
And this pawn ought to be maad £and figured in this manere.
He must be made like a man £that holdeth £in his right hand £a payr of sheris or forcettis, £and in the lyfte hand a grete knyf, £and on his gurdel a penner and an ynkhorn, £and on his eere a penne to wryte with.
And that been the instrumentis and the offyces £that been maad and putte £in wrytyng autentique, £and ought to have passyd £tofore the juges as libelles, writes, condempnacions, and sentences.
And that is signefied £by the scripture and the penne. £And on that other parte, £hit aperteyneth to them £to cutte clothe, £shere, dyght, and dye.
And that is signefyed £by the forcettis or sheris.
And the other ought to shave berdis £and kembe the heeris.
And the other ben coupers, coryers, tawyers, skynners, bouchers, and kordwanners.
And these ben signefyed £by the knyf £that he holdeth £in hys hand.
And somme of thyse forsayd crafty men £been named drapers or clothmakers, £for so moche as they werke with wolle.
And the notaries, skynnars, coryours, and cordwaners werke £by skynnes and hydes £as perchymyn, velume, peltrie, and cordewan.
And the tayllours, £cutters of cloth, £wevars, fullars, dyers, £and many other craftes £ocupye and use wulle.
And al thyse crafty men, £and many other that I have not named, £ought to do theyr craft and mestier, £where as they ben duly ordeyned £curiously and trewly.
Also, there ought to be £amonge thyse crafty men £amyable companye and trewe, £honest contenaunce, £and trouthe in theyr wordes.
And hit is to wete £that the notaryes ben ryght prouffytable £and ought £to be good and trewe £for the comyn.
And they ought to kepe them £from appropryyng to them self £that thyng that aperteyneth to the comyn.
And yf they be good to themself, £they ben good to other.
And yf they be evyl for themself, £they ben evyl for other.
And the processes that ben maad £tofore the juges ought £to ben wreton and passyd by them.
And it is to wete £that by their writyng in the processis £may come moche prouffit.
And also, yf they wryte otherwyse £than they ought to doo, £may ensewe moche harme and domage £to the comyn.
Therfore ought they to take good hede £that they chaunge not, £ne corumpe in no wise, £the content of the sentence.
For than ben they first forsworne £and ben bounden £to make amendis to them £that by their trecherye they have endomaged.
And also ought they to rede, visite, £and to knowe the statutes, ordenaunces, £and the lawes of the citees £of the contré 
where they dwelle and enhabite.
And they ought £to considere £yf there be onythyng therin conteyned £ayenst right and reson.
And yf they fynde onythynge contraire, £they ought to admoneste £and warne them £that governe that suche thynges £may be chaunged in to better estate.
For custume establisshed £ayenst good maners £and ageynst the fayth £ought not to be holden by ryght.
For as hit is sayd £in the decree £in the chappytre £tofore all ordenaunce maad £ayenst right ought to be holden for nought. £Alas, who is now that advocate or notarye £that hath charge to wryte £and kepe sentence £that putteth his entente £to kepe more the comyn prouffyt £or as moche as his owen! £But alle drede of God is put aback, £and they deceyve the symple men £and drawen them £to the courtes disordenatly, £and constrayne them to swere £and make othes not covenable.
And in assemblyng the peple thus togyder, £they make mo traysons in the cytees £thenne they make good alyaunces.
And otherwhile they deceyve theyr soverayns, £whan they may do hit covertly.
For there is nothyng at this day £that so moche greveth Rome and Italie £as doth the College of Notaryes and Advocates Publique, £for they ben not of one accorde.
Alas! £And in Engelond, £what hurte doon the advocates, £men of lawe, £and attorneyes of court £to the comyn peple of the royame, £as wel in the spirituel lawe £as in the temporalle! £How torne they the lawe and statutes £at their plesure! £How ete they the peple! £How enpovere they the comynté! £I suppose that in alle Cristendom £are not so many pletars, attorneys, £and men of the lawe £as been in Englond onely.
For yf they were nombrid, £alle that longe £to the courtes of the chaunserye, £kynge’s benche, £comyn place, cheker, ressayt, and helle, £and the bagge berars of the same, £hit shold amounte to a grete multitude.
And how al thyse lyve and of whom, £yf hit shold be uttrid and tolde, £hit shold not be belevyd, £for they entende to theyr synguler wele and prouffyt £and not to the comyn.
How wel they ought to be £of good wyl togyder, £and admoneste and warne the cytees, £eche in his right in suche wyse £that they myght have pees and love, £one wyth another.
And Tullyus saith £that frendshyp and good wylle £that one ought to have ayenst another £for the wele of hym £that he loveth, £with the semblable wylle of hym, £ought to be put forth £tofore al other thynges.
And ther is nothyng £so resemblyng and lyke to the bees £that maken hony £ne so covenable £in prosperité and in adversité, £as is love.
For by love, £gladly the bees holden them togyder, £and yf ony trespace to that other, £anone they renne £upon the malefactour £for to punysshe hym.
And veray trewe love faylleth £never for wele ne for evyl.
And the most swete £and the most comfortyng thyng is £for to have a frend £to whom a man may say his secret, £as wel as to hymself.
But verayly, amytye and frendshyp £is somtyme founded £upon somme thyng delectable.
And this amytie cometh of yongthe, £in the which dwellith a disordynate hete.
And otherwhile, £amytie is founded £upon honesté.
And this amytie is vertuous, £of the whiche Tullyus saith £that there is an amytie vertuous £by the whiche a man ought to do £to his frende £al that he requyreth by reason.
For for to do to hym a thyng dishonest, £it is ayenst the nature £of veray frendshyp and amytye.
And thus for frendshyp £ne for favour a man £ought not to doo onythyng unresonable £ayenst the comyn prouffyt, £ner agaynst his fayth, £ne ageynst his othe.
For yf alle tho thynges £that the frendes desyre and requyre £were accomplisshed and doon, £hyt shold seme £that they shold be dyshoneste conivracions, £and they myght £otherwhyle more greve and hurte £than proffyte and ayde.
And herof sayth Seneque £that amytye is of suche wylle £as the frende wylle, £and to refuse £that ought to be refused by reason.
And yet he saith more, £that a man ought to alowe £and preise his frend £tofore the peple, £and to correcte and to chastyse hym pryvely, £for the lawe of amytie is suche.
For a man ought not to demaunde £ner do to be doon £to hys frende no vylayns thyng £that ought to be kept secrete.
And Valerian sayth £that it is a foule thynge £and an evyl excusasion £yf a man confesse £that he hath doon ony evyl £for his frende ayenst right and reason.
And sayth that there was a good man named Taffyle, £whiche herde one his frende £requyre of hym a thynge dishoneste, £whiche he denyed £and wold not do.
And than his frende said £to hym in grete despyte, £“What nede have I £of thy frendship and amytee £whan thou wilt not do that thyng £that I requyre of thee?" £And Taffile answerd to hym, £“What nede have I of the frendship £and of the amyte of thee, £yf I shold do £for thee thyng dishonest?" £And thus love is founded £otherwhile upon good prouffytable, £and this love endureth £as longe as he seeth his prouffyt.
And herof men say a comyn proverbe in Englond, £that love lasteth £as longe as the money endurith, £and whan the money failleth £than there is no love.
And Varro rehercith in his sommes £that the riche men ben al lovyd by this love, £for their frendes £ben like as the huske £whiche is about the grayn.
And no man may prove his frende £so wel as in adversité 
or whan he is poure, £for the veray trewe frende fayleth £at no nede.
And Seneque saith that somme £folowe the emperour for riches, £and so don the flies the hony £for the swetenes, £and the wolf the carayn.
And thyse companye folowe the praye £and not the man. £And Tullyus sayth £that Tarquyn the Proud £had a nevewe of his suster, £whiche was named Brutus, £and this nevewe £had banysshed Tarquin out of Rome £and had sent hym in exyle.
And than sayd he fyrst £that he parceyved and knewe his frendes £whyche were trewe and untrewe, £and that he never perceyved afore tyme £whan he was puyssaunt £for to do theyr wylle, £and sayd wel that the love £that they had to hym endured not £but as longe as hit was £to them prouffytable.
And therfore ought al the riche men £of the world take hede, £be they kynges, prynces, or duckes, £to what people they doo prouffyt £and how they may and ought be lovyd £of theyr peple.
For Cathon sayth in his book, £“See to whom thou gevest.
And thys love whiche is founded £upon theyr prouffit, £whiche fayleth and endureth not, £may better be callid and sayd ‘marchaundyse’ 
than love.
For yf we repute this love £to our prouffyt onely, £and nothyng to the prouffyt of hym £that we love, £it is more marchaundyse than love, £for he byeth our love £for the prouffyt £that he doth to us."
And therfore sayth £the versefier thyse two versis: £“Tempore felici multi numerantur amici / £Cum fortuna perit £nullus amicus erit," £whiche is to say in Englissh that £“as longe as a man is ewrous and fortunat, £he hath many frendes, £but whan fortune torneth and perissheth, £there abydeth not to hym one frende."
And of thys love ben loved the £medowes, feldes, trees, £and the bestys £for the prouffyt £that men take of them.
But the love of the men £ought to be charité, £veray gracious and pure £by good fayth.
And the veray trewe frendes ben knowen £in pure adversité.
And Piers Alphons sayth £in his Book of Moralité 
that there was a phylosophre in Arabye £that had an onely sone, £of whom he demaunded £what frendes £he had goten hym in his lyf.
And he answerd that he had many. £And his fader sayd to hym, £“I am an olde man, £and yet coude I never fynde £but one frende in al my lyf.
And I trowe verely £that it is no lytyl thyng £for to have a frende, £and hit is wel gretter £and more a man to have many.
And hit apperteyneth £and behoveth a man to assaye £and preve his frende £or he have nede."
And thenne commaunded the philosopher his sone £that he shold goo £and slee a swyne £and put hit in a sacke, £and fayne that it were a man dede £that he had slayn, £and bere hit £to his frendes £for to burye hit secretly.
And whan the sone had don £as his fader £commaunded hym, £and had requyred his frendes one after another £as afore is sayd, £they denyed hym £and answerd to hym £that he was a vylayne £to requyre and desire of them thyng £that was so perilous.
And than he came agayn £to his fader £and sayd to hym £how he had requyred al his frendes, £and that he had not founden one £that wold helpe hym in his nede.
And than his fader sayd to hym £that he shold goo £and requyre his frende, £whyche had but one, £and requyre hym £that he shold helpe hym in his nede.
And whan he had requyred hym, £anone he put out al his mayné 
out of hys hows.
And whan they were £out of the waye or aslepe, £he dyd do make secretly a pytte in the grounde.
And whan hit was redy £and wold have buryed the body, £he founde hit an hogge or a swyne, £and not a man.
And thus this sone prevyd this man £to be a veray, £trewe frende of his fader, £and prevyd that his frendes £were fals frendes of fortune.
And yet reherceth £the sayd Piers Alphons £that there were two marchauntes, £one of Bandach £and that other of Egypt, £whiche were so joyned togeder £by so grete frendshyp £that he of Bandache cam on a tyme £for to se hys frende in Egypt, £of whom he was receyvyd right honuurably.
And this marchaunt of Egypt had £in his hows a fayre yonge mayden £whom he shold have had £in mariage to hymself, £of the whiche mayde thys marchaunt of Bandach £was esprised with her love £so ardantly that he was right seek, £and that men supposid hym to dye.
And than the other dyd do come the phisisiens, £whiche sayd that in hym was no sekenes £sauf passyon of love.
Thenne he axyd of the seek man £yf there were ony woman in hys hows £that he loved and maad al the women £of his hows £to come tofore hym.
And than he chees her £that shold have ben £that other’s wyf £and sayd that he was seek for her.
Than his frende sayd to hym, £“Frende, comforte yourself.
For trewly I gyve her to you to wyf £with alle the dowaire £that is gyven to me wyth her. £" 
And had lever to suffre £to be wythout wyf £than to lese the body of his frende.
And than he of Bandach wedded the mayde £and went with his wyf £and with his richesse ageyn £in to his contré.
And after this, £anone after, hit happend £that the marchaunt of Egypt £became so poure £by evyl fortune £that he was constreyned to seche £and begge his breed by the contray, £in so moche that he cam to Bandach.
And whan he entrid in to the toun, £hit was derk nyght £that he coude not fynde the hows £of his frende £but went and lay thys nyght £in an olde temple.
And on the morne, £whan he shold yssue out of the temple, £the offycers of the toun arestyd hym £and sayd that he was an homycide £and had slayn a man £whiche lay there dede.
And anone he confessid hyt £wyth a good wylle, £and had lever to ben hangyd £than to dye £in that myserable and pour lyf £that he suffryd.
And thus whan he was brought to jugement, £and sentence shold have ben gyven £ayenst hym £as an homycide, £his frend of Bandach cam £and sawe hym, £and anone knewe £that thys £was his good frende of Egypte.
And forthwyth stepte in £and sayd that he hymself £was culpable £of the deth of this man £and not that other, £and enforcid hym £in alle maners £for to delyver and excuse that other.
And than whan that he that had doon the feet £and had slayne the man sawe this thyng, £he considerid in hymself £that these two men were innocent of thys feet.
And doubtyng the dyvyne jugement, £he came tofore the juge £and confessyd al the feet by ordre.
And whan the juge sawe £and herde al thys mater, £and also the causes, £he considered the ferme and trewe love £that was betwene the two frendes, £and understood the cause £why that one wold save that other, £and the trouth of the fayte of the homycide.
And than he pardoned al the feet £hooly and entierly.
And after, £the marchaunt of Bandach £brought hym of Egipt £wyth hym in to his hows, £and gaf to hym his sister in mariage, £and departed to hym half his goodes.
And so bothe of hem were riche, £and thus were they bothe £veray faythful and trewe frendes.
Furthermore, notaries, men of lawe, £and crafty men £shold and ought to love eche other, £and also ought to be contynent, chaste, and honeste.
For by theyr craftes £they ought so to be by necessyté.
For they converse and accompanye them £ofte tyme wyth women.
And therfore hit apperteyneth to them £to be chaste and honeste.
And that they meve not the women, £nor entyse them to lawghe and jape £by ony dysordynate ensignes or tokenes.
Titus Livius reherceth that the philosopher Democreon £dyd doo put out his eyen £for as moche £as he myght not beholde the women £wythoute flesshly desyre.
And how wel it is sayd £before that he dyd hit £for other certeyn cause.
Yet was this one of the pryncipal causes.
And Valerian tellyth £that there was a yong man of Rome £of right excellent beaulté.
And how wel that he was right chaste, £for as moche as his beaulté 
mevyd many women to desire hym, £insomoche that he understood £that the parentes £and frendes of them £had suspecion in hym, £he dyd his vysage £to be kutte £wyth a knyf and lancettis, £endlong and everthwart £for to deforme his vysage, £and had lever have a fowle vysage £and disformed £than the beauté of his vysage £shold meve other to synne.
And also we rede £that there was a nonne, a virgyne, £dyd do put out bothe her eyen, £for as moche as the beauté of her eyen £mevyd a kyng to love her, £whyche eyen she sente £to the kyng in a present.
And also we rede that Plato, £the right ryche phylosopher, £lefte his owne lande and contré, £and chase his mansion £and dwellyng in Achadomye, £a toun whiche was not onely destroyed £but also was ful of pestelence, £so that by the cure and charge and customaunce of sorowe £that he there suffrid £myght eschewe the hetes £and occasions of lecherye.
And many of hys dysciples dyd in lyke wyse.
Helemand reherceth £that Demostenes the philosopher laye ones £by a noble woman £for his dysporte, £and playeng wyth her, £he demaunded of her £what he shold geve £to have to doo wyth her.
And she answerd to hym, £“A thousand pens."
And he sayd ageyn to her, £“I shold repente me £to bye hit so dere."
And whan he advysed hym that, £he was so sore chauffyd £to speke to her £for to accomplisshe his flesshly desyre, £he despoyled hym £al nakyd and wente £and put hym £in the myddes of the snowe.
And Ovyde rehercith £that thys thynge £is the leste that maye helpe £and most greve the lovers.
And therfore Saynt Augustyn rehercith £in his book, £De civitate dei, £that there was a right noble Romayn named Marculian £that wan and took the noble cité of Siracuse.
And tofore, er he dyd doo £assayle hit or befight hit, £and or he had do beshedde ony blood, £he wepte and shedde many teeris £tofore the cité.
And that was for the cause £that he doubted £that his peple £shold defoule and corumpe £to moche dishonestly the chastyté 
of the toun, £and ordeyned upon payn of deth £that no man £shold be so hardy £to take and defoyle ony woman £by force what that ever she were.
After thys, £the crafty men ought to understonde £for to be trewe £and to have trouth in her mouthes, £and that theyr dedes £folowe theyr wordes.
For he that sayth one thyng £and doth another, £he condempneth hymself £by his word.
Also, they ought to see wel £to that they be of one accorde in good, £by entente, by word, and by dede, £so that they be not discordaunt £in no caas, £but that every man have pure verité 
and trouth in hymself.
For God Hymself is pure verité.
And men say comynly £that trouth seketh £none hernes, ne corners.
And trouth is a vertu £by the whiche alle drede £and fraude is put awey.
Men saye trewly £whan they saye that they knowe, £and they that knowe not trouthe £ought to knowe hyt £and alwey use trouthe.
For Saynt Austyn sayth £that they that wene to knowe trouth £and lyveth evyl and vyciously, £it is folye £yf he knoweth hit not.
And also, he sayth in another place £that it is better £to suffre payn for trouth £than for to have a benefete £by falsnes or by flaterye.
And man that is callyd a beste resonable, £and doth not his werkys £after reson and trouthe, £is more bestyal than ony beste brute.
And knowe ye that for to come £to the trouthe hit cometh £of a resonable forsight in his mynde.
And lyeng cometh of an oultrageous £and contrarie thought in hys mynde.
For he that lyeth £wittyngly knoweth £wel that hit £is ageynst the trouthe £that he thynketh.
And herof speketh Saynt Bernard £and sayth that the mouth £that lyeth £destroyeth the sowle.
And yet sayth Saynt Austyn in another place, £“For to say one thynge £and do the contrarye maketh doctryne suspecious."
And knowe ye verily £that for to lye £is a right perilous thynge £to body and sowle.
For the lye that the auncient enemye £maad Eve and Adam £to beleve hym, £made hem for to be dampned £with alle their lignage £to the deth pardurable, £and made hem to be cast £out of paradyse terrestre.
For he maad them to beleve £that God had not forboden them the fruyt £but onely bycause they shold not knowe £that her Mayster knewe.
But how wel that the devyl sayd thyse wordes £yet had he double entente £to hem bothe.
For they knewe anone £as they had tastyd of the fruyt £that they were dampned £to the deth pardurable.
And God knewe hit wel tofore.
But they supposid wel £to have knowen many other thynges £and to be lyke £unto his knowleche and science. £And therfore saith Saynt Poule £in a pistyl: £“Hit ne apperteyneth to saver or knowe more £than behoveth to saver or knowe, £but to saver or knowe £by mesure or sobrenes. £" 
And Valerian rehercith £that there was a good woman of Siracusane £that wold not lye £unto the Kyng of Secille, £whyche was named Dyonyse.
And this kyng was so ful of tyrannye £and so cruel £that alle the world £desired his deth and cursid hym, £sauf this woman onely, £whiche was so olde £that she had seen £three or four kynges reignyng in the contré.
And every mornyng, £as sone as she was rysen, £she prayed to God £that he wold gyve £unto the tyraunt good lyf and longe £and that she myght never see his deth.
And whan the Kyng Dyonyse knewe this, £he sent for her £and mervaylled moche herof, £for he knewe wel £that he was sore behated, £and demaunded her £what cause mevyd hyr £to praye for hym.
And she answerd and sayd to hym, £“Sir, £whan I was a mayde, £we had a right evyl tyraunt to our kyng, £of whom we coveyted sore the deth.
And whan he was dede, £there came after hym a werse, £of whom we coveyted also the deth.
And whan we were delyveryd of hym, £thou camest to be our lord, £which art worst of al other.
And now I doubte yf we have one after thee £he shal be worse than thou art. £And therfore I shal praye for thee."
And whan Dyonyse understood £that she was so hardy in sayeng the trouth, £he durst not do torment her for shame £by cause she was so olde.
The fourth chappitre £of the third book tretith £of the maner of the fourth pawn £and of the marchauntis or chaungers.
Capitulo quarto.
The fourth pawn is sette tofore the kyng £and is formed in the forme of a man holdyng £in his right hand a balaunce £and the weyght in the lyft hand, £and tofore hym a table, £and at his gurdel a purse £ful of money redy for to geve £to them that requyred hit.
And by thys peple ben signefyed £the marchauntes of cloth, lynnen, and wollen, £and of al other marchaundyses.
And by the table that is tofore hym £is signefyed the chaungers £and they that lene money.
And they that bye and selle £by the weyght ben signefyed £by the balaunces and weyghtes.
And the customers, tollars, £and receyvours of rentes £and of money £ben signefyed by the purse.
And knowe ye that £alle they that ben signefied £by this peple £ought to flee avarice and covetyse, £and eschewe brekyng £of the dayes of payment, £and ought to holde and kepe theyr promyses, £and ought also to rendre and restore £that that is gyven to them to kepe.
And therfore hit is reson £that this peple be set £tofore the kyng, £for as moche as they signefye the receyvours £of the tresours ryal £that ought alwey £to be redy £tofore the kyng, £and to answer for hym £to the knyghtes £and to other persones £for theyr wages and souldyes.
And therfore have I said £that they ought to flee avarice, £for avarice is as moche to say £as an adourer £or as worshypar of fals ymages.
And herof sayth Tullyus £that avarice is a covetise £to gete that thyng £that is above necessité.
And it is a love disordynate £to have onythyng, £and it is one of the werst thynges £that is, £and specially to prynces £and to them £that governe the thynges of the comuneté.
And this vyce causeth a man to do evyll, £and thys doyng evyl £is whan hit reygneth £in olde men.
And herof sayth Seneque £that all worldly thynges £ben mortefyed and appetissed £in olde men, £reservyd avarice onely, £whyche alwey abydeth wyth hym £and dyeth with hym.
But I understonde not wel the cause £wherof this cometh £ne wherfore hit may be.
And hit is a fowle thyng £and contrarye to reson £that whan a man is £at the ende of his journey £for to lengthe his viage £and to ordeyne more vitayl £than hym behoveth.
And this may wel be likned £to the avaricious wolf, £for the wolf doth never good £tyl he be dede.
And thus it is sayd £in the proverbys of the wyse men £that the avaricious man £doth no good £tyl that he be deed, £and he desireth nothynge £but to lyve long in thys synne.
For the covetous man certeynly £is not good for onythyng, £for he is evyl to hymself £and to the riche and to the poure, £and fyndeth cause £to gaynsay theyr desire.
And herof rehercith Seneque, £and sayth that Antigonus £was a covetous prynce.
And whan Tynque, £whiche was his frende, £requyred of hym a besaunt, £he answerd to hym £that he demaunded more £than hyt apperteyned to hym.
And than Tynque, £constrayned by grete necessité, £axid and requyred of hym a peny.
And he answerd to hym £that it was no yefte covenable £for a kyng.
And so he was alwey redy £to fynde £a cause nought to geve, £for he myght have gyven to hym a besaunt £as a kynge £to his frende £and the peny £as to a poure man.
And ther is nothyng so litil £but that the humanyté of a kyng £may geve hyt.
Avarice ful of covetise £is a maner of al vices of luxurye.
And Josephus rehercith £in the Book of Auncient Histories £that ther was in Rome £a right noble lady named Paulyne, £and was of the most noble of Rome, £right honest for the noblesse of chastité, £whiche was maryed in the tyme £that the wommen glorefyed them £in theyr chastyté 
unto a yonge man, fayr, noble, £and riche above al other, £and was lyke and semblable £to his wyf in al caasis.
And thys Pawlyne was belovyd £of a knyght namyd Enymerancian £and was so ardantly esprised in her love £that he sent to her £many right riche yeftes £and made to her many grete promyses.
But he myght never torne the herte of her, £which was on her syde £also colde and harde as marbyll.
But she had lever £to refuse his yeftes £and hys promyses £than to entende to covetyse £and to lose her chastyté.
And we rede also £in the Histories of Rome £that there was a noble lady of Rome £whiche lyved a solytarye lyf £and was chaste and honeste, £and had gadrid togeder £a grete somme of golde, £and had hyd hit in the erthe £in a pytte £wythin her hows.
And whan she was deed, £the bisshop dyd do burye her £in the chirche £wel and honestly.
And anone after, £this gold was founden £and born to the bysshop.
And the bisshop had to caste hit £in to the pytte £where she was buryed.
And thre dayes men herd her crye £and make grete noyse, £and say that she brenned £in grete payn, £and they herd her ofte tymes £thus tormentid in the chirche.
The neyghbours went unto the bysshop £and tolde hym therof, £and the bisshop gaf hem leve £to open the sepulcre.
And whan they had openyd hit, £they fonde al the golde molten £with fire ful of sulphre, £and was poured and put in her mouth.
And they herd one say, £“Thou desiredest this gold by covetyse! £Take hyt and drynke hyt!" £And thenne they took the body £out of the tombe.
And hit was cast out £in a prevy place.
Seneque rehercith £in the Boook of the Cryes of Women £that avaryce is foundement of alle vyces.
And Valerian rehercith £that avarice is a ferdful garde £or kepar of richessis, £for he that hath on hym £or in his kepyng moche money £or other richessis £is alwey aferd £to lose hit £or to be robbid £or to be slayn therfore.
And he is not ewrous ner happy £that by covetise getith hit.
And al the evyls of this vice of avarice £had a man of Rome named Septenulle, £for he was a frend of one named Tarchus.
And this Septenulle brent so sore and so cruelly £in this synne of covetise £that he had no shame to smyte £of the hede of hys frend by trayson, £for as moche as one Framosian had promysed to hym £as moche weyght of pure gold £as the heed wayed.
And he bare the said heed £upon a staf thrugh the cité of Rome, £and he voyded the brayn out therof £and filled hyt ful of leed £for to weye the hevyar.
This was a right horrible and cruel avarice.
Ptolomé, Kyng of Egipciens, £poursewed avarice in another manere.
For whan Anthonie, £Emperour of Rome, £sawe that he was right riche £of gold and silver, £he had hym in grete hate £and tormentid hym right cruelly.
And whan he shold perissh £bycause of his richessis, £he toke al his havoir £and put hyt in a shippe, £and went withalle £into the hye see to the ende £for to drowne and perissh there £the shippe and his richesses £bycause Anthonye, his enemye, £shold not have hit.
And whan he was there, £he durst not perisshe hit, £ner myght not fynde in hys herte £to departe from hit, £but cam and brought hit agayn £into his hows, £where he receyvyd £the rewarde of deth therfore.
And without doubte he was not lord of the richesse, £but the richesse was lady over hym.
And therfore hit is said in proverbe £that a man ought to seignorie £over the riches, £and not for to serve hit.
And yf thou canst dewly use thy richesse, £than she is thy chamberer.
And yf thou cannot departe from hit £and use hit honestly £at thy plesure, £knowe verily that she is thy lady.
For the riches never satisfyeth the covetous, £but the more he hath, £the more he desireth.
And Saluste saith that avarice destroubleth fayth, £poesté, honesté, £and al thise other good vertues, £and taketh for thyse vertues pryde, cruelté, £and to forgete God, £and sayth that al thynges be vendable.
And after this, £they ought to be ware £that they lene not to moche, £ner make so grete creaunces £by whiche they may falle in poverté.
For Saynt Ambrose saith upon Thoby: £“Poverté hath no lawe, £for to owe, hit is a shame, £and to owe and not paye £is a more shame.
Yf thou be poure, £beware how thou borowest and thynke £how thou mayst paye £and rendre agayn.
Yf thou be riche, £thou hast no nede £to borowe and axe." £And it is said £in the proverbis £that hit is fraude £to take that thou wylt not ner mayst 
[not] rendre and paye agayn.
And also, hit is sayd in reproche: £“Whan I lene, £I am thy frende, £and whan I axe, £I am thyn enemye," £as who saith God £at the lenyng £and the devyll atte rendryng.
And Seneke saith in his auctorités £that they that gladly borowe ought gladly to paye, £and ought to surmounte in corage £to love hem the better £bycause they lene hem and ayde hem in her nede.
For benefetes £and good tornes don £to a man ought to gyve hym £thankynges therfore, £and moche more ought a man to repaye £that is lent hym in his nede.
But now in these dayes £many men by lenyng £of their money have made £of their frendes enemyes.
And herof speketh Domas the philosopher £and saith that, £“My frende borowed money of me, £and I have lost my frende and my money." £There was a marchaunt of Gene £and also a chaungeour whos name was Albert Ganor.
And this Albert was a man £of grete trouth and loyalté.
For on a tyme there was a man cam to hym £and sayd and affermyd £that he had delyveryd £into his banke £five honderd floryns of gold to kepe, £whiche was not trouth, £for he lyed, £whiche five honderd floryns £the sayd Albert knewe not of, £ner coude fynde in al his bookes £ony suche money £to hym due.
And this lyar coude brynge no wytnes, £but began to braye, crye, £and deffame the said Albert.
And than this Albert callyd to hym £this marchaunt and sayd, £“Dere frende, £take here five honderd florens £whiche thou affermest £and sayest £that thou hast delyverd to me." £And forthwyth tolde hem £and toke hem to hym.
And lo this good man had lever £to lose his good £than his good name and renome.
And this other marchaunt toke these florens £that he had wrongfully receyvyd £and enployed them £in dyverse marchaundyse, £in so moche that he gate and encresid and wan £with them fifteen thousand florens. £And whan he sawe £that he approched toward his deth, £and that he had no children, £he establisshed Albert £his heyr in al thynges, £and sayd that with the five honderd florens £that he had receyvyd of Albert falsely, £he had goten alle £that he had in the world.
And thus by devyne purveaunce, £he that had be a theef fraudelent £was maad afterward £a trewe procurour and atorney £of the sayd Albert.
But now in thyse dayes £there be marchauntis £that do marchaundise £with other menny’s money £whiche is taken to hem to kepe.
And whan they ben requyred £to repaye hyt, £they have no shame £to denye hit appertly.
Wherof hit happend £that ther was a marchaunt which had a good and a grete name £and renome of kepyng £wel suche thynges £as was delyveryd to hym to kepe.
But whan he sawe place and tyme, £he reteyned hit lyke a theef.
So hit befel £that a marchaunt of without forth £herd the good reporte and fame £of this man, £cam to hym, £and delyverd hym grete tresour to kepe.
And thys tresour abode three yere £in his kepyng.
And after this thre yere, £thys marchaunt came and requyred £to have his good delyverd to hym agayn.
And thys man knewe wel £that he had no recorde £ne witnes to preve on hym this dueté, £nor he had no obligacion £ne wrytyng of hym therof, £in suche wyse £that he denyed al entierly £and sayd playnly he knewe hym not.
And whan this good man herd and understood this, £he went sorowfully and wepyng from hym £so ferre and longe £that an olde woman mette wyth hym £and demaunded of hym £the cause of his wepyng.
And he sayd to her, £“Woman hit aperteyneth nothyng to thee! £Goo thy waye!" £And she prayed hym £that he wold telle her £the cause of his sorowe, £for paraventure she myght geve hym £counceyl good and proffytable.
And thenne this man tolde to her £by ordre the caas of his fortune.
And the olde woman, £that was wyse and subtil, £demaunded of hym £yf he had in that cité ony frende £whiche wold be faythful and trewe £to hym.
And he sayd £“ye," that he had dyverse frendes.
Than sayd she, £“Goo thou to them and saye to them £that they doo ordeyne £and bye dyverce cofres and chestes, £and that they doo fylle them £wyth somme olde thynges of no value, £and that they fayne and say £that they be ful £of golde, silver, and other jewels, £and of moche grete tresour.
And thenne that they brynge them £to thys sayd marchaunt, £and to say to hym £that he wold kepe them, £for as moche as they had grete trust in hym, £and also that they have herd £of his grete trouth £and good renome, £and also they wold go £into fer contré 
and shold be longe £er they retorned agayn.
And whilis they speke to hym £of this mater, £thou shalt come upon them £and requyre hym £that he doo delyver £to thee £that thou tokest to hym.
And I trowe, £bycause of tho good men £that than shal proffre to hym £the sayd tresour £and for the covetise to have hit, £he shal delyver £to thee thy good agayn.
But beware! £Late hym not knowe £they ben thy good frendes ner £of thy knowleche." £This was a grete and good counceyl £of a woman.
And verily it cometh of nature £often tymes to women £to geve counceyl shortly £and unadvysedly to thynges £that ben in doubte or perilous £and nedeth hasty remedye.
And as ye have herd, £this good man dyd, £and did after her counceyl, £and came upon them £whan they spack of the mater £to the marchaunt £for to delyver to hym £the sayd cofres to kepe, £whiche his frendes had fayned, £and requyred of hym £that he had taken to hym to kepe.
And than anone £the sayd marchaunt sayd to hym, £“I knowe thee now wel.
For I have advysed me £that thou art suche a man, £and camest to me suche a tyme, £and delyvered to me suche a thynge £whyche I have wel kept. £" 
And thenne callyd his clerk £and bad hym goo fetche suche a thyng £in suche a place £and delyver hit £to that good man, £“for he delyverd hit to me. £" 
And than the good man receyvyd his good £and went his waye right joyously and glad.
And this marchaunt trichour and deceyvour was defrauded £from his evyl malice.
And he ne had neyther that one £ne that other onythyng £that was of value.
And therfore hit is sayd in proverbe, £“To defraude the begiler £is no fraude." £And he that doth wel £foloweth our Lord.
And Seneke sayth £that charité enseigneth and techeth £that men shold paye wel, £for good payement £is somtyme good confessyon.
And this marchaunt trichour £and deceyvour resemblith £and is lyke to an hound £that bereth a chese in his mouth £whan he swymmeth over a water.
For whan he is on the watre, £he seeth the shadowe of the chese £in the watre, £and than he weneth hit be another chese.
And for covetyse to have that, £he openyth his mouth £to catche that.
And than the chese £that he bare fallith doun £into the watre, £and thus he loseth bothe two.
And in the same wyse £was servyd thys marchaunt deceyvour.
For for to have the cofres £whiche he had not seen, £he delyverd agayn £that he wold have holden wrongfully, £and thus by his covetise £and propre malyce £he was deceyved.
And therfore hit apperteyneth £to every good and wyse man £to knowe and considere in hymself £how moche he hath receyved of other men.
And upon what condycion hit £was delyverd to hym. £And it is to wete £that thys thyng apperteyneth £to receyvours and to chaungeours, £and to alle trewe marchauntis and other, £what that somever they be, £and ought to kepe theyr bookes £of resaytes and of payementes £of whom and to whom, £and what tyme and day.
And yf ye demaunde £what thyng makyth them £to forgete suche thynges £as ben taken to them to kepe, £I answer and say £that it is grete covetise £for to have tho thynges to themself £and never to departe from them.
And hit is alle her thought and desire £to assemble alle the goodes £that they may gete, £for they beleve on none other god, £but on her richesses £theyr hertes ben so obstynat.
And this suffyseth of the marchauntes.
